post-merge updates: pos page (#7116)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/index.md

sidebar: true
---

> Proof-of-stake (PoS) is Ethereum's [consensus mechanism](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/). Ethereum switched on its proof-of-stake mechanism in 2022 because it is more secure, less energy-intensive, and better for implementing new scaling solutions compared to the previous consensus mechanism, [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof-of-stake (PoS) underlies Ethereum's [consensus mechanism](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/). Ethereum switched on its proof-of-stake mechanism in 2022 because it is more secure, less energy-intensive, and better for implementing new scaling solutions compared to the previous [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow) architecture.
```

## Prerequisites {#prerequisites}

To better understand this page, we recommend you first read up on [consensus mechanisms](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/).

## What is proof-of-stake (PoS)? {#what-is-pos}

> Proof-of-stake is a type of [consensus mechanism](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/) used by blockchains to achieve distributed consensus. In proof-of-work, miners prove they have capital at risk by expending energy. In proof-of-stake, validators explicitly stake capital in the form of ETH into a smart contract on Ethereum. This staked ETH then acts as collateral that can be destroyed if the validator behaves dishonestly or lazily. The validator is then responsible for checking that new blocks propagated over the network are valid and occasionally creating and propagating new blocks themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proof-of-stake underlies certain [consensus mechanisms](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/) used by blockchains to achieve distributed consensus. In proof-of-work, miners prove they have capital at risk by expending energy. Ethereum uses proof-of-stake, where validators explicitly stake capital in the form of ETH into a smart contract on Ethereum. This staked ETH then acts as collateral that can be destroyed if the validator behaves dishonestly or lazily. The validator is then responsible for checking that new blocks propagated over the network are valid and occasionally creating and propagating new blocks themselves.
```

## Fork choice {#fork-choice}

When the network performs optimally and honestly, there is only ever one new block at the head of the chain, and all validators attest to it. However, it is possible for validators to have different views of the head of the chain due to network latency or because a block proposer has equivocated. Therefore, consensus clients require an algorithm to decide which one to favor. The algorithm used in proof-of-stake Ethereum is called [LMD-GHOST](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.03052.pdf), and it works by identifying the fork that has the greatest weight of attestations in its history.

## Proof-of-stake and security {#pos-and-security}

> The threat of a [51% attack](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/1/51-attack.asp) still exists on proof-of-stake as it does on proof-of-work, but it's even riskier for the attackers. A attacker would need 51% of the staked ETH. They could then use their own attestations to ensure their preferred fork was the one with the most accumulated attestations. The 'weight' of accumulated attestations is what consensus clients use to determine the correct chain, so this attacker would be able to make their fork the canonical one. However, a strength of proof-of-stake over proof-of-work is that the community has flexibility in mounting a counter-attack. For example, the honest validators could decide to keep building on the minority chain and ignore the attacker's fork while encouraging apps, exchanges, and pools to do the same. They could also decide to forcibly remove the attacker from the network and destroy their staked ETH. These are strong economic defenses against a 51% attack.

Reviewer: @jmcook1186 Ignore me if you feel this is out-of-scope, but should we note here that even with 51% support to make this the "canonical chain" the attacked is still unable to finalize without 67% support?

Author: It will finalize - the attacker has 51% of stake so honest nodes' fork choice algorithm will go along with the attacker's preferred chain - it is the heaviest by definition. The only thing an attacker "buys" by increasing their stake from 51 -> 66% is finality reversion.

- [The Beacon Chain Ethereum 2.0 explainer you need to read first](https://ethos.dev/beacon-chain/) _Ethos.dev_
- [Why Proof of Stake (Nov 2020)](https://vitalik.ca/general/2020/11/06/pos2020.html) _Vitalik Buterin_
- [Proof of Stake: How I Learned to Love Weak Subjectivity](https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/11/25/proof-stake-learned-love-weak-subjectivity/) _Vitalik Buterin_

> - [PoS Ethereum attack and defense](https://mirror.xyz/jmcook.eth/YqHargbVWVNRQqQpVpzrqEQ8IqwNUJDIpwRP7SS5FXs)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Proof-of-stake Ethereum attack and defense](https://mirror.xyz/jmcook.eth/YqHargbVWVNRQqQpVpzrqEQ8IqwNUJDIpwRP7SS5FXs)
```
